2 Weeks in Italy: Perfect 14-Day Itinerary for First-Time Visitors (+Map & Tips)
Visit Italy in 2 weeks
2 Weeks in Italy: Perfect 14-Day Itinerary for First-Time Visitors
Good to Know Before You Go:

Season: You can do this 2-week Italy itinerary in any season. Some coastal areas are quieter in winter, but still worth a visit if you want to include them.

Fewer hotel changes: This itinerary is designed in such a way that you don’t have to change hotels too often. This will save time on packing and logistics and give you more time to explore.

Travel by train: Since most stops are major cities, we don’t recommend renting a car for this trip. You can’t do much with a car in Rome or in Venice, and you can easily travel between the main cities by train.

When a car makes sense: If you want to explore northern Italy more in-depth, consider renting a car after visiting Venice and returning it in Milan. It’s ideal for extra stops in the Dolomites, Lake Garda, or other nearby areas.
Prefer to have it all organized? If you’d rather leave the planning to someone else, check out Rabbie’s, which offers great Italy travel packages and small-group tours covering the main highlights.

How to use this itinerary: The suggested route starts in Rome and ends in Milan, both with excellent international flight connections. You can also do it in reverse or adapt it into a round trip depending on your flights and interests.

This is our recommended Italy itinerary that covers all the best places in two weeks:

Day 1: Arrival in Rome
There is no better place to start your Italian vacation than in the Eternal City – the capital city of Italy – Rome.

For this itinerary, I recommend that you spend at least 3 full days in Rome: 2 days in the city itself, plus make a day trip to Pompeii and the Amalfi Coast. This way, you won’t have to change hotels too often and can see (albeit very shortly) some of the best places in southern Italy as well.

Depending on when your flight arrives, you might be able to see some of the landmarks of Rome on the first day already.

TIP: If you can make it time-wise, I highly recommend joining an evening walking tour of the city’s highlights. It’s a great first introduction to Rome.

Accommodation: Stay in Rome for 4 nights. A recommendation is to stay in 9Hotel Cesari.

Days 2-3: Rome
While two days are really short for Rome, if you plan well, you can see most of the ‘musts’ in just 2 days.

We recommend focusing on the main attractions, such as the Vatican, the Colosseum, and all the famous sights in the historic city center (Trevi Fountain, Pantheon, etc.). In addition, you can also add one or two more local experiences, such as a food tour. It will make your visit more memorable and also a bit more relaxing!

Good to know: Be sure to book your tickets/tours for the Colosseum and also for the Vatican in advance!!! Both are extremely popular, and tickets often sell out (in high season, sometimes even a few weeks in advance).

TIP: This digital Rome Tourist Card allows you to book timed entry tickets for both these attractions in one go, so you can immediately see what’s open/available and can adjust your itinerary if needed. Plus, it gives you a 10% off on other attractions in Rome.

PRO TIP: If tickets are sold out, you can usually still join a guided tour. In fact, we highly recommend taking one anyway, especially if you want to visit the Colosseum Underground, which is only accessible with a guide.

Days 2-3: Rome
While two days are really short for Rome, if you plan well, you can see most of the ‘musts’ in just 2 days.

We recommend focusing on the main attractions, such as the Vatican, the Colosseum, and all the famous sights in the historic city center (Trevi Fountain, Pantheon, etc.). In addition, you can also add one or two more local experiences, such as a food tour. It will make your visit more memorable and also a bit more relaxing!

Good to know: Be sure to book your tickets/tours for the Colosseum and also for the Vatican in advance!!! Both are extremely popular, and tickets often sell out (in high season, sometimes even a few weeks in advance).

TIP: This digital Rome Tourist Card allows you to book timed entry tickets for both these attractions in one go, so you can immediately see what’s open/available and can adjust your itinerary if needed. Plus, it gives you a 10% off on other attractions in Rome.

PRO TIP: If tickets are sold out, you can usually still join a guided tour. In fact, we highly recommend taking one anyway, especially if you want to visit the Colosseum Underground, which is only accessible with a guide.

Day 5: Rome to Florence & Visit Florence
Next on your Italy itinerary is Tuscany, one of the most beautiful regions in the country. We recommend basing yourself in Florence for the next few days. Florence is one of the most beautiful cities in Italy and is well worth a visit, but there are also some really nice places that you can see nearby. With just a few days here, you’ll have difficulties choosing where to go and what to skip!

Florence is just a short ride from Rome (+-1.5 hrs by train). Try to get an early train so you have enough time to explore the city after you arrive and drop off your luggage at your hotel.

On the first day in Florence, be sure to visit the musts, such as the Duomo Cathedral, the Uffizi Gallery, and/or Accademia Gallery. Depending on your interests, you can visit one or all three, but be sure to plan it well.

Good to know: All these places require a ticket and are extremely popular, so it’s essential to get tickets/tours in advance! Having your sightseeing itinerary well-planned upfront is the only way not to miss any of the most important sights and keep your Italian vacation enjoyable without feeling overwhelmed.

Then, stroll the streets of the city center and see some of the main highlights that don’t absolutely require tickets or reservations – such as Ponte Vecchio, Piazza della Signoria, Basilica Santa Croce, etc.

Accommodation: Stay in Florence for at least 3 nights. Florence city center isn’t that big, but to make things easier with the luggage and tours, we recommend staying close to the railway station. An accommodation recommendation is Hotel Croce di Malta – the location is excellent, they have a pool, and you can’t beat those rooftop views! On a lower budget, B&B Le Stanze del Duomo is a super popular option in the center.

Day 6: Tuscany Day Tour from Florence
While there’s plenty to see and do in Florence to fill a few days, you’ll likely want to see some of the famous Tuscan countryside as well. So on your second day in Florence, we recommend taking a day tour to some of the nicest towns of Tuscany.

You could just take a train and visit the cities like Siena or Pisa on your own, but you would likely only see one town that way (and waste too much time in transit). Also here – if you want to make the most of your time, it’s best to go with an organized tour that visits a few of the very best places in a day.

Day 7: Cinque Terre Day Trip from Florence
Next is another place that’s probably high on your Italy bucket list – Cinque Terre. The famous 5 villages on the Ligurian coast are among the most visited and most photographed places in Italy.

If you plan well, it’s possible to see the best of Cinque Terre in just a day, also if you are visiting from Florence. You could take a train to La Spezia and on to Cinque Terre.

However, Cinque Terre is very popular and extremely busy (especially in the high season from March to October). So planning a quick visit here might be overwhelming…


Alternative or Additional Day
If you are visiting Italy in the low season, you may want to skip Cinque Terre and visit Bologna instead (it’s just 40 minutes by train from Florence). Or, you could also add a stop in Bologna when traveling between Florence and Venice.

One day is enough to see the main sights in Bologna and it’s worth it if you can squeeze it in. But – as already mentioned before – you can add extra days pretty much everywhere in this itinerary and still not see it all…

Day 8: Florence to Venice & Explore Venice
The second part of this 2-week Italy itinerary brings you to northern Italy. The next stop is Venice, just about 2.5 hrs from Florence by train. Venice is one of the most unique cities in the world and so no Italy trip itinerary would be complete without visiting here!

If you take a train early in the morning, you’ll be in Venice by noon, which leaves you plenty of time to get acquainted with the city and see some of the main highlights. We recommend spending 2 nights here, so you have 1.5 days, plus two evenings in Venice. Venice is magical at night – the city is so pretty and you can appreciate it so much more without all the day tourists around.

On your first day, you could tick some of the must-see places on your Venice bucket list. One of the musts is St. Mark’s Square and Cathedral (one of the most beautiful churches in Italy), and the other – Doge’s Palace, just next door. Needless to say, these are very popular attractions, so also here you have to book your tickets (or tours) in advance.

Afterward, explore the city center on foot, see Rialto Bridge and the Grand Canal. You should also take a Venetian gondola ride, which is another must-do in Venice!

Accommodation: Stay in Venice for 2 nights. To make things easy, you could stay close to the railway station; Hotel Carlton On The Grand Canal is a very popular option here. Alternatively, simply take a water bus and stay in the center. H10 Palazzo Canova is close to the Rialto Bridge. 

Day 9: Venice
Today, you have an entire day to explore Venice and its surroundings. You could spend the day in the city, or you could also take a half-day trip to the nearby islands Murano, Burano, and Torcello (there are various boat tours that visit the islands in 4-6 hours).

While not an absolute must, a visit to these islands is a nice opportunity to see some smaller Italian towns. Murano is famous for its glass-blowing factories, Burano – for its lace and colorful houses, and Torcello – for its Byzantine Basilica. In addition, the towns are very colorful and picturesque, and completely different from Venice.

That said, there is so much to see and do in Venice that you will easily fill the entire day in the city too. So it all depends on your interests and how many activities you want to pack into your itinerary.

As a minimum, in addition to the places mentioned before, we recommend going to the top of St. Mark’s Campanile for some of the best views over the city and the Venetian Lagoon. It is now possible to reserve the tickets in advance – do it, or you’ll waste too much time queuing. If you can do it first thing in the morning or late afternoon, it will be easier to plan the rest of your day.

TIP: If you are looking for something special to do in Venice in the evening, consider a concert or a traveling opera performance.

Good to know: Next on your itinerary is Verona, Lake Garda, and Lake Como. If you want to explore these areas deeper, Venice would be a good place to rent a car for the remainder of this trip.

You can easily visit Verona by car, drive to (and maybe even around) Lake Garda, visit Lake Como, and then return the car in Milan.

Renting a car in Italy is normally not expensive, but driving and parking in the small towns by the lakes – especially in high season – can be very challenging.

Anyway, the rest of the itinerary below is created assuming you take a train. But you can easily adjust it if you decide to drive.

Day 10: Venice to Verona & Explore Verona
The next stop on this Italian itinerary is Verona, one of the most romantic cities in Italy. It gets this reputation because of Shakespeare’s “Romeo and Juliet”, and Juliet’s House is one of the top attractions in the city.

The train ride between Venice and Verona takes about 1.5 hours, so you’ll have a big part of the day left to explore Verona. The city is quite compact and you should be able to see all the musts in a day.

As a minimum, be sure not to miss the Verona Arena, built 2000 years ago (best get a priority ticket!). Also the views from Torre dei Lamberti and the earlier-mentioned Juliet’s House with its famous balcony are must-see in Verona.

Just as in all the other cities, you can also find some really nice Verona city tours led by locals. There are walking tours, a very nice bike tour, and this food tour is very popular as well. The nice thing about Verona is that it’s not that big, and so you can see a lot at a rather relaxed pace.

Accommodation: Stay in Verona for 2 nights. We recommend Hotel Milano & SPA***S – it offers excellent price/quality in the city center. And yes, it also has a beautiful rooftop terrace with an amazing view – something we recommend in every city in this itinerary because we just love hotels with great rooftop views. It makes any city visit so much more memorable!

Day 11: Lake Garda Day Trip from Verona
Lake Garda is one of the most beautiful lakes in Italy and if you have an extra day in your itinerary, it’s well worth planning a short visit here as well. This is especially the case if you are traveling in the warmer months.

If you don’t mind changing hotels more often, you could stay in Sirmione on your way between Verona and Milan. However, keep in mind that there is no direct train from Verona to Sirmione, so you’ll have to travel by bus or train + bus, or arrange a private transfer. To make it easier and simpler to plan, you can just visit Lake Garda as a (half) day trip from Verona. It’s good not to have to pack/ unpack every day.

You can come here by public transport and explore on your own. In that case, be sure to decide in advance where you’ll visit – just Sirmione or also some other towns along the lake, and research the public transport options to get back to Verona in the evening. 

There’s also a nice tour from Verona that visits Sirmione town and includes a short boat ride on the lake. Sirmione is one of the best places to see at Lake Garda and the one that’s the easiest to visit if you don’t rent a car and/or don’t have at least a few days in the area.

TIP: If visiting on weekends in summer (Thursday to Sunday, from +- mid-June to early September), consider attending an opera at the Verona Arena in the evening. It’s a special experience!

Alternative: If you decide to skip Lake Garda altogether, you could add an extra day in Florence or in Bologna, as mentioned before. Or – if you visit Lake Garda with a half-day tour, you could take a train to Milan on this day already and save some time in your itinerary this way.

Day 12: Verona to Milan & Explore Milan
The final destination in this 2-week Italy itinerary is Milan, from where you can also visit the beautiful Lake Como.

One of Italy’s biggest and richest cities, Milan is also one of the most fascinating places in the country. It has such a unique mix of old, historic places and modern contemporary lifestyle and architecture. Plus, if you like Italian fashion and want to do some shopping, Milan will not disappoint either.

The train ride from Verona to Milan takes about 1.5 hours, and since you have almost two days for the city alone, you should be able to see all the musts in a rather relaxed way.

On your first day in Milan, you could visit the two main attractions – the Duomo Cathedral and see Leonardo Da Vinci’s Last Supper. There are also some great tours that visit The Last Supper and some of them also bring you to the Cathedral. It’s also well worth visiting the Duomo rooftop, but you can leave it for the next morning too.

Good to know: Also here, whatever you decide, be sure to book tickets/ tours for the most popular places in advance! Tickets for The Last Supper are often sold out a few months upfront, but finding a guided tour is much easier (they pre-book tickets and can usually accommodate last-minute bookings as well).

Accommodation: Stay in Milan for 3 nights. Hotel Dei Cavalieri Milano Duomo is a great option right in the heart of the old town.

Day 13: Milan
Today, you have an entire day to explore Milan. Visit the highlights in the old city center, but don’t miss the modern part of the town either!

If you already visited the Duomo and/or Duomo Terraces and/or Da Vinci’s Last Supper the day before, just adjust your itinerary accordingly.

If you have some time left, you can go shopping in the center or visit Designer Outlet Serravalle (although this one will likely require an entire day).

In the evening, head to the Navigli district, aka the canals of Milan. It’s a very nice and lively neighborhood with lots of restaurants, bars, and cafes – a perfect place to end the day of sightseeing.

Day 14: Lake Como Day Trip from Milan
On the last day of your 2 weeks in Italy, we recommend visiting another famous lake in northern Italy, Lake Como. Located just near Milan, it’s an easy day trip destination and a wonderful addition to any Italian itinerary!

Just as with Lake Garda, you could visit Lake Como on your own. In that case, simply take a train from Milan to one of the towns (Como or Varenna are both good options) and then explore further.

However, ideally, you also take a boat trip on the lake and visit several of the nicest towns of Lake Como instead of one. And for that, it’s easier to join an organized tour and have them guide you to all the best places without having to plan or arrange anything.

https://fullsuitcase.com/italy-itinerary-2-weeks/


