3 Days in Rome: The Ultimate Rome Itinerary
1. Where to go in Rome: 
Below is a list of the places to visit if you have a few days in Rome. All of these are included on this Rome itinerary. 
* Colosseum
* Roman Forum
* Vatican Museums & Sistine Chapel
* St. Peter’s Basilica
* Trevi Fountain
* Pantheon
* Spanish Steps
* Piazza Navona
* Borghese Gallery
* Castel Sant’Angelo
* Trastevere
* Altar of the Fatherland
* Appian Way
* Catacombs

Plan my 3-day trip to Rome:
Rome Itinerary Day 1
Colosseum, Roman Forum, Altar of the Fatherland, Trastevere
9:00 am: The Colosseum
10:30 am: Roman Forum & Palatine Hill
12:30 pm: Lunch
2:00 pm: Altar of the Fatherland
3:00 pm: Capitoline Hill
5:00 pm: Aperitif at Oro Bistrot
7:00 pm: Trastevere
How to Visit the Colosseum

On your visit to the Colosseum, you can either wander through it on your own, take the audio guide tour, or join a guided tour. Most visits last 1 to 3 hours.

You must purchase your entrance ticket in advance (you cannot just show up and get in line for a ticket).

If online tickets are sold out for your dates of travel, I recommend joining a guided tour of the Colosseum. You will spend a little more money than purchasing your tickets directly from the Colosseum website, but at least you will get to visit the Colosseum. 

10:30 am: Roman Forum & Palatine Hill
The Roman Forum and Palatine Hill are a short walk from the Colosseum. They are both included on your entrance ticket into the Colosseum. If you are on a guided tour of the Colosseum, most tours will continue to the Roman Forum and Palatine Hill.
From the Colosseum, walk up Via Sacra towards the Arch of Titus to enter the Roman Forum and Palatine Hill. Visit Palatine Hill first and then the Roman Forum.
Palatine Hill
Palatine Hill sits next to the Roman Forum. It is a complex of archaeological excavations, the remains of temples and palaces, and a museum. During the time of the Roman Republic, many imperial palaces were built here, including palaces for Augustus, Tiberius, and Domitian.
While on Palatine Hill, make sure you visit Terrazza Belvedere del Palatino for a bird’s eye view of the Roman Forum and the Colosseum. It’s one of the best views in Rome.
12:30 pm: Lunch
For lunch we recommend La Prezzemolina. This highly rated restaurant serves Italian street food and pizza al taglio (pizza by the slice) at budget-friendly prices. It’s one of our favorite restaurants in Rome.
Other restaurants near these spots: 
Fuorinorma. This is another place to get a good, cheap bite near the Colosseum. They serve charcuterie boards, paninis, and wine.
The Court Mixology Bar. This cocktail bar sits on top of Palazzo Manfredi and has an amazing view of the Colosseum. They don’t open until 6 pm but it could be worth a return visit later in the day, for drinks with a view of the Colosseum.

2:00 pm: Altar of the Fatherland
The Altar of the Fatherland, also called Altare della Patria, the Victor Emmanuel II Monument, or simply the “wedding cake,” is one of the most recognizable landmarks in Rome.
This national monument was built between 1885 and 1935 to honor Victor Emmanuel II, who was the first king of unified Italy. It contains the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier and an eternal flame.
For free, you can climb the series of staircases to the upper terrace and café. For the best view, ride the elevator to the top of the monument for panoramic views of Rome. From here, you can see all of Rome’s major landmarks, including the Colosseum, St. Peter’s Basilica, Palatine Hill, and the Roman Forum.
3:00 pm: Capitoline Hill
There are two reasons to visit Capitoline Hill: for a great view of the Roman Forum and to visit the Capitoline Museums.
To get here from the Altar of the Fatherland, it is a 3-minute walk along Via del Teatro di Marcello. You will walk up a series of steps to get to Campidoglio, which is the square on Capitoline Hill. This square was designed by Michelangelo.
5:00 pm: Aperitif at Oro Bistrot
Having an aperitif (an aperitivo) is a pre-dinner drink that is served with a few small snacks. It is popular thing to do in Italy and a great way to unwind after a busy day sightseeing.
A place to go for a drink with a view is Oro Bistrot. It is located very close to Piazza Venezia and is a 7-minute walk from Capitoline Hill.
Oro Bistrot is a rooftop terrace that has a spectacular view of the Altar of the Fatherland and the Trajan Forum. They open mid-afternoon and you can have a drink here and then move on or stay for dinner (dinner does not start until 7 pm). Make a reservation in advance for drinks and dinner.
7:00 pm: Trastevere
You have the option to spend all evening at Oro Bistrot, or you can go to Trastevere. This neighborhood is filled with some of the best restaurants in Rome and it is a lovely area to explore.

Rome Itinerary: Day 2
Vatican Museums, St. Peter’s Basilica, Castel Sant’Angelo, Historic Heart of Rome
Morning (7:30/8:00 am): Vatican City
12:00 pm: Lunch
1:30 pm: Castel Sant’Angelo
3:00 pm: Scenic Walk to Piazza Navona
3:20 pm: Historic Heart of Rome
5:30 pm: Free Time or Rooftop Bar
7:00 pm: Dinner

Morning (7:30/8:00 am): Vatican City
Vatican City is the smallest country in the world. In Vatican City, there are three big sites to visit: the Vatican Museums, the Sistine Chapel, and St. Peter’s Basilica.
There are several ways to visit Vatican City. You can take a guided tour or visit it independently. Taking a tour is more expensive but has several advantages.
Taking a tour is much more educational, as a knowledgeable guide will teach you about important sights within the museums and concentrate on the most important things to see. Some tours take you right from the Sistine Chapel into St. Peter’s Basilica, which can save you a lot of time (you get to skip the line into St. Peter’s Basilica). Yes, a tour is more expensive but skipping that line is well worth the extra money.
Here are three different ways to plan your visit to Vatican City:

BEST OPTION: Early morning guided tour of Vatican City. The Vatican Museums open at 9 am. On an early morning tour, you enter at 8 am, which allows you to see part of the museums with very low crowds. Some tours will take you directly into St. Peter’s Basilica via the tunnel from the Sistine Chapel, which bypasses the enormous line to enter the cathedral. An early morning tour is pricier (on average you will spend about €80 to €135 per person), but it is an all-around better experience. We recommend this early morning tour (it is with the same tour company we used).

CHEAPEST OPTION: Between 7:30 am to 8 am, go first to St. Peter’s Basilica. This early in the day, there should be little to no line to enter the cathedral. Once inside, do the dome climb first, then visit the rest of the cathedral (learn more about what to see and do in our guide How to Visit Vatican City). After the basilica, visit the Vatican Museums (book tickets for a 10 am entry, and do this several weeks before your visit). You will tour the museums and Sistine Chapel on your own, without a guide. The museums will be busy so be prepared for some crowds.
GUIDED TOUR: The early morning tours of Vatican City are expensive, since you are paying for early access. You can save some money and still take a guided tour by choosing a tour that starts at 9 am, which is opening time of the museums. This tour gets nothing but stellar reviews and includes the Vatican Museums, Sistine Chapel, and St. Peter’s Basilica.

12:00 pm: Lunch
For lunch, we have three recommendations that are all within walking distance of St. Peter’s Square. You can either have a quick lunch or a longer, leisurely lunch.
Quick lunch at Alice Pizza, dining on pizza by slice. It’s great if you are on a budget or are saving your money for dinner. Two other restaurants are Borghiciana Pastificio Artiginale and Scialla the Original Streetfood.

1:30 pm: Castel Sant’Angelo
Stroll along Via della Conciliazione towards Castel Sant’Angelo (and look back several times for the amazing view of St. Peter’s Basilica).
As you walk to Castel Sant’Angelo, you have the option to make a small detour to Ponte Vittorio Emanuele II for a beautiful view of the castle and Ponte Sant’Angelo.

3:00 pm: Scenic Walk to Piazza Navona
Cross the Tiber River on Ponte Sant’Angelo (the bridge that crosses the Tiber River in front of Castel Sant’Angelo). This bridge is lined with angels and is a great photo spot.

3:20 pm: Historic Heart of Rome
Piazza Navona is one of Rome’s most famous squares. It is filled with cafes, fountains, and lots of people. While you are here, take a look at the three fountains (the Fountain of the Four Rivers, the Fountain of Neptune, and the Fountain of the Moor), watch the street performers, and step inside Sant Agnese in Agone.
Continue to the Trevi Fountain, passing by the Temple of Hadrian and Venchi (one of our favorite gelato shops in Rome).
The Trevi Fountain is one of the busiest places to visit in Rome. If you want to leave the crowds behind, visit Garden Roof Trevi (also called Trevi Rooftop). This tiny rooftop bar overlooks the Trevi Fountain. You can have a drink with a view and rest your feet for a few minutes.
Continue to the Trevi Fountain, passing by the Temple of Hadrian and Venchi (one of our favorite gelato shops in Rome).
The Trevi Fountain is one of the busiest places to visit in Rome. If you want to leave the crowds behind, visit Garden Roof Trevi (also called Trevi Rooftop). This tiny rooftop bar overlooks the Trevi Fountain. You can have a drink with a view and rest your feet for a few minutes.
5:30 pm: Free Time or Rooftop Bar
Dinner in Rome does not typically start until 7 pm. That gives you some free time. You can either return to your hotel for a little bit or visit a nearby rooftop bar for an aperitif and another nice view of Rome.
Just a one-minute walk from the top of the Spanish Steps is Cielo Terrace, which is on top of the Rocco Forte Hotel de la Ville

7:00 pm: Dinner
For dinner, you can stay at Cielo Terrace or have dinner elsewhere. 

Rome Itinerary Day 3
Appian Way, Catacombs, Borghese Gallery
In the morning, cycle on the Appian Way and tour the Catacombs. In the afternoon, visit the Borghese Gallery, a museum that contains one of the best art collections in the world.
9:00 am: Appian Way & Catacombs
3:00 pm: Borghese Gallery
5:00 pm: Villa Borghese Gardens
6:00 pm: Aperitif
7:00 pm: Dinner
Morning: The Appian Way & the Catacombs
The Appian Way is an ancient Roman road that was built to connect Rome to Brindisi. Many monuments lie along this road, including the Circus of Maxentius and numerous catacombs.
If you are visiting Rome with kids, this is one of the best things to do in Rome.
To visit the Appian Way, you can either rent bikes and cycle the road on your own or take a tour. Many tours use e-bikes and include a visit to the catacombs.
3:00 pm: Borghese Gallery
I put the Borghese Gallery at 3 pm, to give you enough time to have lunch and get here from the Appian Way. Plus, you will have to arrive 30 minutes before your tour time to pick up your tickets.
Getting to the Borghese Gallery: The closest metro station is Barberini and from here it is a 20-minute walk or a quick bus ride to get to the Borghese Gallery. You also have the option to use the bus, taxi, or Uber.
5:00 pm: Villa Borghese Gardens
After your visit to Villa Borghese, take a stroll through the gardens. Notable things to see include Tempio di Esculapio (a small temple on the lake) and Orologio ad Acqua del Pincio (a hydropower clock).
At the far end of the Villa Borghese Gardens, you will be standing on Terrazza del Pincio. From here, you will overlook Piazza del Popolo.
6:00 pm: Dinner
If you aren’t getting tired of rooftop bars yet, we have a few more recommendations. Just a short walk from Piazza del Popolo is Terrazza Nainer. A little farther away is AcquaRoof Terrazza Molinari. This rooftop bar and restaurant serves amazing pasta dishes.

 Transportation in Rome: 
How to Get Around Rome
The majority of the must-see sights in Rome are located in central Rome. It’s possible to get around mainly by walking, but you can save your steps, and a little bit of time, by also using the Rome metro, the bus, or taking a taxi.


