Italian tourism:
* Popular attractions and landmarks in Italy:
If you are planning your first trip to Italy, be prepared to fall in love with an extraordinary country. The food, the wine, the history, the art and architecture, the quaint, hillside towns in Tuscany, and the picturesque Dolomites…there is something here for everyone. The list of places to visit in Italy is long. So long, in fact, that it would take months to see all of them. Most people have just a week or two to explore this amazing country.

Italy holds a special place in our hearts. We have visited Italy six times over the past ten years, exploring Italy from top to bottom. With each trip, our love for this incredible country grows even deeper. This list highlights our favorite places to visit in Italy. It might seem extensive, but believe it or not, this is the narrowed-down version!

Here is a list of Italy’s best destinations, a good starting point for having the best holiday here. At the end of this guide, we list multiple itineraries in Italy, so you can link several of these places together into one very memorable trip.

Have fun picking out the places you want to visit!

Best Places to Visit in Italy
1. Rome
??? Best Time: April, May, September, October
?? How Long: 2 to 3 days
??? Where to Stay: City center

Rome. Just hearing the name conjures up some of the most famous landmarks in the world…the Colosseum, the Sistine Chapel, and the Vatican. The history here spans 28 centuries, making Rome one of the oldest inhabited cites in Europe (and one of the best places to visit in Italy).

This city is a wonderful blend of historical sites, charming piazzas and neighborhoods, world-class museums, and iconic sites. For the first-time visitor, Rome belongs at or near the top of your list. It’s a big, bustling city but the main sites are clustered around the historic city center.
Top Experiences in Rome: The Colosseum, the Pantheon, Trevi Fountain, the Vatican Museums and Sistine Chapel, and the Borghese Museum. Walk through the historic heart of Rome, explore Piazza Navona and Campo de’Fiori, and have dinner in Trastevere.

Ideas for Traveling with Kids: Rent bikes and bike the Appian Way. It’s a fun way to spend a morning or afternoon, and it’s the perfect sightseeing break for kids. This was Tyler and Kara’s favorite thing to do in Rome (they were 9 and 11 at the time).

How Much Time Should You Spend in Rome? You can hit the main sites in a rushed one-day tour of the city. With two days in Rome you can see the highlights, what we list above under top experiences. With even more time, you can explore Rome’s nooks and crannies, take a food tour, and venture off-the-beaten path.
1. Where to go in Rome:
Below is a list of the places to visit if you have a few days in Rome. All of these are included on this Rome itinerary. 
* Colosseum
* Roman Forum
* Vatican Museums & Sistine Chapel
* St. Peter’s Basilica
* Trevi Fountain
* Pantheon
* Spanish Steps
* Piazza Navona
* Borghese Gallery
* Castel Sant’Angelo
* Trastevere
* Altar of the Fatherland
* Appian Way
* Catacombs

Plan my 3-day trip to Rome:
Rome Itinerary Day 1
Colosseum, Roman Forum, Altar of the Fatherland, Trastevere
9:00 am: The Colosseum
10:30 am: Roman Forum & Palatine Hill
12:30 pm: Lunch
2:00 pm: Altar of the Fatherland
3:00 pm: Capitoline Hill
5:00 pm: Aperitif at Oro Bistrot
7:00 pm: Trastevere
How to Visit the Colosseum

On your visit to the Colosseum, you can either wander through it on your own, take the audio guide tour, or join a guided tour. Most visits last 1 to 3 hours.

You must purchase your entrance ticket in advance (you cannot just show up and get in line for a ticket).

If online tickets are sold out for your dates of travel, I recommend joining a guided tour of the Colosseum. You will spend a little more money than purchasing your tickets directly from the Colosseum website, but at least you will get to visit the Colosseum. 

10:30 am: Roman Forum & Palatine Hill
The Roman Forum and Palatine Hill are a short walk from the Colosseum. They are both included on your entrance ticket into the Colosseum. If you are on a guided tour of the Colosseum, most tours will continue to the Roman Forum and Palatine Hill.
From the Colosseum, walk up Via Sacra towards the Arch of Titus to enter the Roman Forum and Palatine Hill. Visit Palatine Hill first and then the Roman Forum.
Palatine Hill
Palatine Hill sits next to the Roman Forum. It is a complex of archaeological excavations, the remains of temples and palaces, and a museum. During the time of the Roman Republic, many imperial palaces were built here, including palaces for Augustus, Tiberius, and Domitian.
While on Palatine Hill, make sure you visit Terrazza Belvedere del Palatino for a bird’s eye view of the Roman Forum and the Colosseum. It’s one of the best views in Rome.
12:30 pm: Lunch
For lunch we recommend La Prezzemolina. This highly rated restaurant serves Italian street food and pizza al taglio (pizza by the slice) at budget-friendly prices. It’s one of our favorite restaurants in Rome.
Other restaurants near these spots: 
Fuorinorma. This is another place to get a good, cheap bite near the Colosseum. They serve charcuterie boards, paninis, and wine.
The Court Mixology Bar. This cocktail bar sits on top of Palazzo Manfredi and has an amazing view of the Colosseum. They don’t open until 6 pm but it could be worth a return visit later in the day, for drinks with a view of the Colosseum.

2:00 pm: Altar of the Fatherland
The Altar of the Fatherland, also called Altare della Patria, the Victor Emmanuel II Monument, or simply the “wedding cake,” is one of the most recognizable landmarks in Rome.
This national monument was built between 1885 and 1935 to honor Victor Emmanuel II, who was the first king of unified Italy. It contains the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier and an eternal flame.
For free, you can climb the series of staircases to the upper terrace and café. For the best view, ride the elevator to the top of the monument for panoramic views of Rome. From here, you can see all of Rome’s major landmarks, including the Colosseum, St. Peter’s Basilica, Palatine Hill, and the Roman Forum.
3:00 pm: Capitoline Hill
There are two reasons to visit Capitoline Hill: for a great view of the Roman Forum and to visit the Capitoline Museums.
To get here from the Altar of the Fatherland, it is a 3-minute walk along Via del Teatro di Marcello. You will walk up a series of steps to get to Campidoglio, which is the square on Capitoline Hill. This square was designed by Michelangelo.
5:00 pm: Aperitif at Oro Bistrot
Having an aperitif (an aperitivo) is a pre-dinner drink that is served with a few small snacks. It is popular thing to do in Italy and a great way to unwind after a busy day sightseeing.
A place to go for a drink with a view is Oro Bistrot. It is located very close to Piazza Venezia and is a 7-minute walk from Capitoline Hill.
Oro Bistrot is a rooftop terrace that has a spectacular view of the Altar of the Fatherland and the Trajan Forum. They open mid-afternoon and you can have a drink here and then move on or stay for dinner (dinner does not start until 7 pm). Make a reservation in advance for drinks and dinner.
7:00 pm: Trastevere
You have the option to spend all evening at Oro Bistrot, or you can go to Trastevere. This neighborhood is filled with some of the best restaurants in Rome and it is a lovely area to explore.

Rome Itinerary: Day 2
Vatican Museums, St. Peter’s Basilica, Castel Sant’Angelo, Historic Heart of Rome
Morning (7:30/8:00 am): Vatican City
12:00 pm: Lunch
1:30 pm: Castel Sant’Angelo
3:00 pm: Scenic Walk to Piazza Navona
3:20 pm: Historic Heart of Rome
5:30 pm: Free Time or Rooftop Bar
7:00 pm: Dinner

Morning (7:30/8:00 am): Vatican City
Vatican City is the smallest country in the world. In Vatican City, there are three big sites to visit: the Vatican Museums, the Sistine Chapel, and St. Peter’s Basilica.
There are several ways to visit Vatican City. You can take a guided tour or visit it independently. Taking a tour is more expensive but has several advantages.
Taking a tour is much more educational, as a knowledgeable guide will teach you about important sights within the museums and concentrate on the most important things to see. Some tours take you right from the Sistine Chapel into St. Peter’s Basilica, which can save you a lot of time (you get to skip the line into St. Peter’s Basilica). Yes, a tour is more expensive but skipping that line is well worth the extra money.
Here are three different ways to plan your visit to Vatican City:

BEST OPTION: Early morning guided tour of Vatican City. The Vatican Museums open at 9 am. On an early morning tour, you enter at 8 am, which allows you to see part of the museums with very low crowds. Some tours will take you directly into St. Peter’s Basilica via the tunnel from the Sistine Chapel, which bypasses the enormous line to enter the cathedral. An early morning tour is pricier (on average you will spend about €80 to €135 per person), but it is an all-around better experience. We recommend this early morning tour (it is with the same tour company we used).

CHEAPEST OPTION: Between 7:30 am to 8 am, go first to St. Peter’s Basilica. This early in the day, there should be little to no line to enter the cathedral. Once inside, do the dome climb first, then visit the rest of the cathedral (learn more about what to see and do in our guide How to Visit Vatican City). After the basilica, visit the Vatican Museums (book tickets for a 10 am entry, and do this several weeks before your visit). You will tour the museums and Sistine Chapel on your own, without a guide. The museums will be busy so be prepared for some crowds.
GUIDED TOUR: The early morning tours of Vatican City are expensive, since you are paying for early access. You can save some money and still take a guided tour by choosing a tour that starts at 9 am, which is opening time of the museums. This tour gets nothing but stellar reviews and includes the Vatican Museums, Sistine Chapel, and St. Peter’s Basilica.

12:00 pm: Lunch
For lunch, we have three recommendations that are all within walking distance of St. Peter’s Square. You can either have a quick lunch or a longer, leisurely lunch.
Quick lunch at Alice Pizza, dining on pizza by slice. It’s great if you are on a budget or are saving your money for dinner. Two other restaurants are Borghiciana Pastificio Artiginale and Scialla the Original Streetfood.

1:30 pm: Castel Sant’Angelo
Stroll along Via della Conciliazione towards Castel Sant’Angelo (and look back several times for the amazing view of St. Peter’s Basilica).
As you walk to Castel Sant’Angelo, you have the option to make a small detour to Ponte Vittorio Emanuele II for a beautiful view of the castle and Ponte Sant’Angelo.

3:00 pm: Scenic Walk to Piazza Navona
Cross the Tiber River on Ponte Sant’Angelo (the bridge that crosses the Tiber River in front of Castel Sant’Angelo). This bridge is lined with angels and is a great photo spot.

3:20 pm: Historic Heart of Rome
Piazza Navona is one of Rome’s most famous squares. It is filled with cafes, fountains, and lots of people. While you are here, take a look at the three fountains (the Fountain of the Four Rivers, the Fountain of Neptune, and the Fountain of the Moor), watch the street performers, and step inside Sant Agnese in Agone.
Continue to the Trevi Fountain, passing by the Temple of Hadrian and Venchi (one of our favorite gelato shops in Rome).
The Trevi Fountain is one of the busiest places to visit in Rome. If you want to leave the crowds behind, visit Garden Roof Trevi (also called Trevi Rooftop). This tiny rooftop bar overlooks the Trevi Fountain. You can have a drink with a view and rest your feet for a few minutes.
Continue to the Trevi Fountain, passing by the Temple of Hadrian and Venchi (one of our favorite gelato shops in Rome).
The Trevi Fountain is one of the busiest places to visit in Rome. If you want to leave the crowds behind, visit Garden Roof Trevi (also called Trevi Rooftop). This tiny rooftop bar overlooks the Trevi Fountain. You can have a drink with a view and rest your feet for a few minutes.
5:30 pm: Free Time or Rooftop Bar
Dinner in Rome does not typically start until 7 pm. That gives you some free time. You can either return to your hotel for a little bit or visit a nearby rooftop bar for an aperitif and another nice view of Rome.
Just a one-minute walk from the top of the Spanish Steps is Cielo Terrace, which is on top of the Rocco Forte Hotel de la Ville

7:00 pm: Dinner
For dinner, you can stay at Cielo Terrace or have dinner elsewhere. 

Rome Itinerary Day 3
Appian Way, Catacombs, Borghese Gallery
In the morning, cycle on the Appian Way and tour the Catacombs. In the afternoon, visit the Borghese Gallery, a museum that contains one of the best art collections in the world.
9:00 am: Appian Way & Catacombs
3:00 pm: Borghese Gallery
5:00 pm: Villa Borghese Gardens
6:00 pm: Aperitif
7:00 pm: Dinner
Morning: The Appian Way & the Catacombs
The Appian Way is an ancient Roman road that was built to connect Rome to Brindisi. Many monuments lie along this road, including the Circus of Maxentius and numerous catacombs.
If you are visiting Rome with kids, this is one of the best things to do in Rome.
To visit the Appian Way, you can either rent bikes and cycle the road on your own or take a tour. Many tours use e-bikes and include a visit to the catacombs.
3:00 pm: Borghese Gallery
I put the Borghese Gallery at 3 pm, to give you enough time to have lunch and get here from the Appian Way. Plus, you will have to arrive 30 minutes before your tour time to pick up your tickets.
Getting to the Borghese Gallery: The closest metro station is Barberini and from here it is a 20-minute walk or a quick bus ride to get to the Borghese Gallery. You also have the option to use the bus, taxi, or Uber.
5:00 pm: Villa Borghese Gardens
After your visit to Villa Borghese, take a stroll through the gardens. Notable things to see include Tempio di Esculapio (a small temple on the lake) and Orologio ad Acqua del Pincio (a hydropower clock).
At the far end of the Villa Borghese Gardens, you will be standing on Terrazza del Pincio. From here, you will overlook Piazza del Popolo.
6:00 pm: Dinner
If you aren’t getting tired of rooftop bars yet, we have a few more recommendations. Just a short walk from Piazza del Popolo is Terrazza Nainer. A little farther away is AcquaRoof Terrazza Molinari. This rooftop bar and restaurant serves amazing pasta dishes.

 Transportation in Rome: 
How to Get Around Rome
The majority of the must-see sights in Rome are located in central Rome. It’s possible to get around mainly by walking, but you can save your steps, and a little bit of time, by also using the Rome metro, the bus, or taking a taxi.

3 Days in Rome: The Ultimate Rome Itinerary


Accommodation in Rome:
The best 5 accommodation spots in Rome are: 
1. Six Senses Rome: For the Ultimate in Luxury: is in the historic heart of Rome, a short walk from the Pantheon and Trevi Fountain.
2. The RomeHello: Perfect for Those on a Budget
3. Hotel Smeraldo: Mid-Range Hotel in the Heart of Rome
4. Romance al Colosseo: Views of the Colosseum
5. Lifestyle Suites Rome: Amazing Views of Piazza Navona
Where to Stay in Rome for the First Time (+ Where NOT to Stay)

2. Florence
??? Best Time: April, May, September, October
?? How Long: 2 days
??? Where to Stay: City center, near the Duomo

Without a doubt, Florence (Firenze) is one of the best places to visit in Italy.
This city was the birthplace of the Renaissance and the art museums here are a testament to that. Michelangelo’s David, the amazing Uffizi Gallery, the frescoes on the dome of the Duomo, and the statues that are on display in the historic city center are spectacular sights to see. But there are enough towers to climb, gelato to eat, and shops to visit that you don’t have to feel like you are on museum overload on a visit to Florence.
Top Experiences: See Michelangelo’s David, climb the Duomo, tour the Uffizi Gallery, stroll across Ponte Vecchio, eat lots of gelato, visit the rooftop bars and restaurants, and watch the sunset over Florence from Piazzale Michelangelo.
Hidden Gems in Florence: The Vasari Corridor, the amazing views from the Bardini Gardens and San Miniato al Monte, and the Brancacci Chapel.
Best Things to Do with 2 Days in Florence
* The Florence Cathedral, aka the Duomo. This complex also includes the dome, the Baptistery, Giotto’s Bell Tower, Santa Reparata, and the Opera del Duomo Museum
* Accademia Gallery to see Michelangelo’s David
* The Uffizi Gallery
* Piazza della Signoria
* Palazzo Vecchio
* Ponte Vecchio
* Piazzale Michelangelo
* Boboli Gardens & Pitti Palace
* Mercato Centrale
* Piazza della Repubblica

Accommodation in Florence: 
Top 5 Recommendations:
1. B&B A Florence View: Mid-Range Hotel with Views of the Duomo
2. Santa Croce 14 B&B: Highly Rated B&B in Santa Croce
3. Pietrapiana Boutique Apartments: A Great Pick for Families
4. Emerald Palace: Budget Property with an Excellent Location
5. Rocco Forte Hotel Savoy: 5-Star Splurge in the City Center
Where to Stay in Florence on Your First Visit (2026 Guide)
2 Days in Florence Itinerary: Best Itinerary for First-Time Visitors


3. Pisa
??? Best Time: April, May, June, September, October
?? How Long: A few hours to 1 day
??? Where to Stay: City center
The Leaning Tower of Pisa is world famous. But is it really worth the visit? We say yes, but only if you already have plans to be in the area. Pisa is worth a quick stop if you are traveling from Florence to the Cinque Terre. Take two hours to pose for photos (along with tons of other travelers) and maybe even climb the tower.
Top Experiences: Climb the tower if heights and vertigo is not an issue for you.
How Long Do You Need in Pisa? You can visit Pisa in two hours if you are traveling between cities such as Florence and the Cinque Terre.

4. Cinque Terre
??? Best Time: April, May, September
?? How Long: 1 to 2 days
??? Where to Stay: Any of the five towns
The Cinque Terre is one of Italy’s most scenic spots. It is here that five colorful, gorgeous towns precariously sit on the hills that tumble into the Mediterranean Sea.
Hike it or hop from town to town by train…this is a gorgeous spot to explore in Italy.

Top Experiences: Exploring the five towns…Riomaggiore, Vernazza, Monterosso al Mare, Manarola, and Corniglia. If you like hiking, you can hike between all five towns in one day. The more you hike the more gelato you get to eat. ?? End in Monterosso and cool off with a quick swim in the Mediterranean.

5. Milan
??? Best Time: April, May, June, September, October
?? How Long: 1 to 2 days
??? Where to Stay: City center
Milan is home to the Duomo, world-class museums, trendy shopping areas, and Leonardo da Vinci’s “Last Supper.” This city is undergoing an architectural Renaissance and it is worth even a few hours on the fastest of itineraries.
6. Lake Como
??? Best Time: May, June, September, October
?? How Long: 1 to 2 days
??? Where to Stay: Como, Bellagio or Varenna
Nestled at the foot of the Alps, Lake Como is one of Italy’s most romantic spots. Leave the hustle and bustle of Italy’s cities behind on a visit here.
Top Experiences: Visit classy Bellagio, explore the town of Varenna, cruise past the villas on Lake Como, and visit Villa Carlotta and Villa del Balbianello

7. Venice
??? Best Time: April, May, June, September
?? How Long: 2 days
??? Where to Stay: San Marco, San Polo, Dorsoduro
Venice is one of our favorite spots in Italy. Why? It is small and compact, perfect to be explored with just a few days time. Venice is romantic, historic, and gorgeous. The canals, the gondolas, the architecture, the colorful towns of Murano and Burano…what is not to love?
Venice is one of the best places to visit in Italy and makes it to the top of the list for many first-time visitors.
Top Experiences: Wander along the canals, take a gondola ride through the city, see St. Mark’s Square, walk across the Rialto Bridge, and visit the Doges’ Palace and Saint Mark’s Basilica.
25 BEST Places to Visit in Italy

* Cultural events and festivals in Italy:
The Complete Guide to Italy’s Festivals and Celebrations:
January 1: Capodanno
Capodanno is what Italians call New Year’s Day. 

Ring in the New Year on December 31st in bars, restaurants and even piazzas throughout Italy, where you’ll undoubtedly see fireworks, and indulge in some of the traditional (and mouthwatering) food. 

Although most stores and restaurants are closed on January 1, keep an eye out for special events around the city. In Venice, for example, there’s a traditional swim in the lagoon. Even though we usually don’t recommend swimming in Venice, this is a great exception–if you can stand the freezing water!

January 6: Epiphany
In Catholic tradition, the Epiphany is when the three wise men finally reach the baby Jesus to worship him and give him gifts of frankincense, gold, and myrrh. 

Today, it’s an important Italian festival for children because of the arrival of La Befana, an old lady who arrives on a broomstick and fills children’s shoes or stockings with candy. 

Though most stores and markets will be closed on this day, many Italian streets will be filled with parades and street fairs in celebration. There will also be boat races in Venice where the racers dress up as La Befana herself!

February: Carnevale
The dates you can celebrate Carnevale in Venice change every year, as the celebration follows the liturgical calendar, so make sure to confirm the exact dates in the official website of the Venice Carnival

Most of the major festivities for this quintessential Italian festival come alive on the weekends, especially the final weekend of the celebration. 

Farther south, Viareggio has wonderful Carnevale celebrations each Sunday during February with massive man-made floats. Themes range from nice scenes to satirical political commentary–each well worth seeing! 

Finally, on the last three days of the festival, you can go to celebrate Carnevale in Ivrea, a small town in Piedmont where the carnival celebrations conclude with The Battle of the Oranges–a massive food fight where oranges are thrown at opposing groups. 

While oranges might sound a little violent, keep in mind that the fight commemorates a medieval battle between the townsfolk and the nobility which resulted in the torching of the local castle.

Spring
April 3: Ravello Concerts
Ravello is a popular destination for travelers year-round but it fills up even more during select dates in the spring and autumn for the annual Ravello Arts Concerts. 

Far from the throngs of summer tourists, this is a time when music lovers fill the gardens and banquet halls of the historic Villa Rufolo for concerts.

Although it began as a chamber music festival, the event has expanded to incorporate jazz music as well as a variety of other disciplines including art shows, dance performances and exhibitions. Today, it boasts more than 1,750 concerts during the two concert seasons, which means there’s sure to be something to suit everyone!

April 10: Procession of The Mysteries, Sicily
It’s common to find processions and pilgrimages filling streets across Sicily during the Easter Holy Week, but perhaps the most famous of all is the Procession of The Mysteries.

Held in Trapani since 1400, it’s one of the oldest Italian festivals and, at a staggering 24 hours, it’s also one of the longest. 

The mysteries are representations of the passion and death of Christ. They’re paraded through the city along with lights, sounds, and surprisingly emotional crowds. 

The procession begins at Anime Sante del Purgatorio Church at 2 p.m. on Good Friday and ends with a return to the church at 2 p.m. on Black Saturday. A cultural as well as religious event, if you’re looking for an authentic Italian festival this is one not to be missed.
April 12: Easter Sunday and the Scoppio del Carro fireworks, Florence
If you’re planning to spend Easter in Italy, here are 5 things you need to know. If you’re spending it in Florence, read on and discover the story of the “explosion of the cart.”

Though Easter Sunday is celebrated with parades and events throughout all of Italy, one of the most memorable is the Scoppio del Carro in Florence. Literally translated as the “explosion of the cart,” this folk tradition commemorates the actions of a young man called Pazzino, a member of Florence’s prominent Pazzi family. 

During the First Crusade he was the first knight to go through the breach in the sacking of Jerusalem and was given three stone fragments from the Holy Sepulchre of Jerusalem as a prize. When he returned, he used the fragments to start a Sacred Fire before the people of Florence. 

Nowadays, this Italian festival reenacts the scene in its entirety. On Easter Sunday, a large wagon filled with fireworks departs from Porta al Prato, hauled by a team of white oxen with soldiers, musicians, and others, following in 15th-century costumes. 

A fire is started using the historic stone, then used to light a string that leads to the cart outside. At the same time Giotto’s Bell Tower bells ring out. The entire firework show usually lasts about 20 minutes and is said to bring good luck–but you’ll want to get there in advance as this free festival fills up fast!
April 13: Pasquetta
The day after Easter–aka Pasquetta or “Little Easter” in Italian–is a national holiday in Italy, and great for Italians, who get the day off work! This is a classic day to meet up with friends post-Easter and head outside to enjoy the new spring weather. 

Most families will use this time to enjoy food leftover from the Easter celebrations and festivities. While you’ll find that most sites and museums are open, to celebrate like the locals we suggest preparing a picnic and joining the rest of Italy outside in a nearby park.

April 19-22: Vinitaly, Verona
VinItaly is the largest wine exhibition in the world, and it’s held in the beautiful UNESCO World Heritage city of Verona. 

For four days visitors can study, taste, buy and share wine in a gathering that also celebrates food, art, and music. For wine aficionados and amateurs alike, this celebration of Italian wine is one of the best ways to get a taste of Italy.

April 21: Rome’s Birthday Celebration
When in Rome, do as the Romans do. And on April 21st, Rome celebrates its birthday in typical Roman fashion – with a party that lasts for days. 

To commemorate the legendary founding of the city by Romulus in 753 B.C., traditional events will take place throughout the city, including the tracciato del solco, or trench-digging ritual, re-enactments of the Palilia ceremony honoring the agricultural goddess Pales, mock Colosseum gladiator battles and other nods to the Eternal City’s epic history and its first emperor. 

The celebration culminates in a costumed parade beginning (and ending) at the Circus Maximus. There’s no better way than this lighthearted Italian festival to truly partake in the city’s rich history.
April 25: Italian Liberation Day & St. Mark’s Day, Venice
The Festa della Liberazione, or Liberation Day, on April 25th marks the end of WWII in Italy, and the day Italy gained independence following Nazi occupation. Band performances, concerts, food stalls, political rallies, and other public events commemorate the victory of the resistance as well as the end of the Fascist regime. 
You’ll see this date on many street signs throughout Italy, and today it stands as a national public holiday, which means that most stores will be closed or operating on weekend hours.
April 25th also happens to be the feast day of St. Mark, the patron saint of Venice. Venetians celebrate their beloved saint with a gondolier regata (boat race) and a huge party in Saint Mark’s Square. 
The feast day also coincides with an ancient tradition called the Festa del Bocolo, or “blooming rose festa”, when men present the women in their lives with a red rosebud (bocolo). Whatever you’re there to do, expect crowds in Venice and don’t forget to bring a rose for your significant other!
May 1: Labor Day
Another national holiday, May 1st marks Italy’s national Labor Day. 
In Rome, it is celebrated with a large concert, or concertone, organized by Italy’s main trade unions, which is used to raise awareness about labor issues in the country. 
Not only does it attract top artists, it draws attendees from all over the world. On this day, expect major museums to be closed and limited choices for public transportation. Italians are off work en masse and the weather is usually nice, meaning it’s a busy weekend for popular destinations throughout the country.
May 24: La Cavalcata Sarda, Sardinia
To mark the beginning of spring, Sardinia holds one of its biggest events in Sassari with the Cavalcata Sarda, or Sardinian Horse Race on the second last Sunday of May. 
Participants dressed in traditional costumes parade through town on horseback, before meeting on a race track at the edge of town for horse races and stunts. 
Held annually since 1899, the festival marks the day when King Umberto I of Italy visited the city to unveil the Piazza d’Italia. Today, the two-day event is proof of the Sardinian’s pride in their history, culture, and island.

May 23-November 29: Venice Biennale
The Venice Biennale is an international cultural exhibition held in Venice.

Art, architecture, cinema, dance, theater, and music exhibitions are held in various locations throughout the city, in the main Biennale Garden pavilions and, most notably, in many of the astounding private buildings and villas in Venice. 

If you have visited the city before and want to peek inside all those beautiful mansions, this is probably the best way without knowing someone who owns one of said mansions. 

Make sure to check out the official website of La Biennale di Venezia to check out their massive program and find all the related events and activities of your area of interest. 

May 15: Festa dei Ceri in Gubbio
One of the oldest Italian folklore events, the Festa dei Ceri in Gubbio is an annual race devoted to St. Ubaldo, the patron saint of Gubbio. 

On May 15th, every year, the people of Gubbio take part in a mystical procession where they carry enormous wooden “candles” from the town center all the way up Mount Ingino to the Basilica of St. Ubaldo. Each candle is crowned with a statue of a saint and the entire structure weighs around 700 lbs. It’s not a fast race, but it’s certainly a unique one!
Summer
May 31: Vogalonga Regata, Venice
The first Vogalonga Regatta took place in 1974, which is young for an Italian festival, but it brought out more than 500 boats and 1,500 rowers. 
The enormous gondola race was created to protest the use of motor traffic in Venice’s canals and renew a sense of pride in Venetian handicrafts and traditions.
Today, approximately 1,550 boats with about 5,800 rowers participate every year on Pentecost for the 30-kilometer race through some of the most scenic parts of Venice’s canals and lagoons.
June 2: Anniversary of the Republic
The Festa della Repubblica celebrates the foundation of the Italian Republic. On June 2, 1946, Italians voted in a referendum to abolish the monarchy and establish a republic in its place. Following the results, the Italian royal family, who had ignited unfavorable opinion by supporting Mussolini, were forced to flee Italy.
Rome holds the largest celebration but, depending on where you are, you can find anything from parades, festivals and concerts to mark the occasion. Luckily, most major sites and museums remain open.
June 16-17: Festival of St. Ranieri, Pisa
This Italian festival has much older roots, dating from 1688 when the remains of Saint Ranieri were placed in an urn at the Cappella dell’Incoronata at the city’s Cathedral. 

A special feast was held including a Luminera where the river and prominent buildings were lit up by candlelight and lamps. This was often done during the time to mark special events and occasions, but the tradition has become tied to Saint Ranieri down through the years.

Today, on June 16th, the churches and buildings lining the Arno, including the cathedral housing the saint’s remains, are lit up with over 70,000 lights and candles. The lights are amplified by their reflections in the water, making for a spectacular sight. 

The celebration also features fireworks, creating a magnificent spectacle. The Festa dei Ranieri, in Pisa, ends with a spectacular boat race on the Arno River on June 17th (the city’s feast day).

June-August: International Festival of Arts in Taormina, Sicily
Also known as Taormina Arte, the town’s reputable cultural festival runs throughout the entire summer and hosts concerts, exhibitions, and the Taormina Film Fest, bringing the best of film into a week of premieres and photo shoots akin to the film festival at Cannes. 

Head to Taormina in the summer and you’ll have your pick of plays, music, dances, cinemas and other events to choose from–including the opera!

June – September: Taormina Opera Festival
Coinciding with their art festival, Taormina’s Summer Opera Festival starts in April and runs through the summer, with some concerts running until December. This is a great opportunity to see classics like Carmen and Don Giovanni performed at very reasonable prices. 

The shows are performed at the town’s Teatro Antico, a huge open-air Greek theater with views across to Mount Etna, as well as the Teatro Greco in Syracuse, further down the coast. You can buy your tickets online or at the box office at Palazzo dei Congressi.

June 13-September 05: Verona Arena Summer Opera Season
Each summer marks the start of Verona’s incredible summer opera season. With affordable tickets and incredible operas, this is not only the perfect place to dip your toe into the opera world, it also happens in one of the world’s most jaw-dropping concert venues. 

The operas are held in the Verona Arena, an open-air Colosseum equivalent that’s more than 2,000 years old. Like the Colosseum in Rome, it has been used for countless purposes over the years but it gained a new lease of life in 1913, when it began to host operas.

Verona is not the only city in Italy with a musical festival. Besides Taormina, you can also head to Lucca, in northwestern Tuscany for their annual Summer Festival. Here you’ll be treated to some of the best pop and rock of the year. Past performers include John Legend, Take That, Bob Dylan, and Sting.

July 10-19: Umbria Jazz, Perugia
Each July, Perugia hosts a 10-day Jazz Festival. Music lovers fill the town’s beautiful piazzas, gardens, and wine bars to experience one of the world’s best-known jazz festivals. 

As a university town, Perugia hosts a fair number of international Italian festival events, such as the scrumptious Eurochocolate and the International Journalism Festival, but there are few things more relaxing than a spectacular jazz concert in an equally spectacular setting.

August 15: Ferragosto
The Feast of the Assumption marks the day the Virgin Mary rose into heaven in the Catholic faith. This Italian festival is now popularly called Ferragosto and it marks the start of the country’s annual vacation period. 

From this date until the beginning of September you’ll find many signs on restaurants and shops in the big cities declaring chiuso per ferie, or closed for vacation. 

Italians typically celebrate Ferragosto by retreating to the coast or countryside with friends and family. Watch out, you might get caught up in the traffic of Italians or the crowds along the coast.

August 16: Palio dell’Assunta, Siena
This ancient horse race is held twice each year, on July 2 and August 16, but the 16th tends to be the most famous, as it’s so near to a national holiday. 

Formerly titled Palio di Siena, it was renamed the Palio dell’Assunta, in honor of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary the day before. 

This medieval tradition pits Siena’s different neighborhoods, or contrade, against each other in a hair-raising bareback horse race around the central Piazza del Campo, which is covered in dirt for the event. The winning jockey claims bragging rights for his contrada for the entire year.

Fall/Winter
September: Regata Storica di Venezia
Practiced for thousands of years, Venice’s Historical Regata is a huge event that includes a water pageant featuring costumes and boats from the 16th-century, with a procession to carry the Doge of Venice, his family, and all the officers up the Grand Canal. 

After the event, four different races are held based on age and boat type, but a firm favorite is the Campioni su Gondolini race, with small, fast gondolas flying down the Grand Canal to victory.

September 2-12: 77th Venice International Film Festival
Alongside Cannes and the Berlin International Film Festival, Venice’s Film Festival is one of the ‘Big Three’ film festivals in the world.

Founded in 1932 as part of the Venice Biennale–which celebrates international art, architecture, dance, music, theater, and cinema–it is also one of the oldest.

Events and screenings take place on the island of Lido in the Venice Lagoon, in the famous Palazzo del Cinema.

October-November: Italy’s Sagre Harvest Festivals
October and November are the prime months for some of the most beloved festivals in Italy – the delicious sagre, or food festivals. 

Typically based around a single, seasonal ingredient, these festivals celebrate a bountiful harvest and the changing of the season. Some of the most famous are the truffle festivals in Piedmont and Umbria, chestnut sagre in Tuscany, and olive sagre in Puglia.

October 16-25: Eurochocolate in Perugia
Eurochocolate is the International Chocolate Exhibition of Europe. One of the largest chocolate festivals in all of Europe, discover different chocolate flavors and cultures from around the world, participate in cooking classes, performances, chocolate-sculpting displays, and, of course, buy and eat all the chocolate you’d like! 

You can also take a tour of the chocolate factory or simply peruse the events going on at the squares around Umbria. 

Taking place since 1993, when it comes to Italy’s festival, this one is a true delight for all chocolate lovers!

November 1: All Saint’s Day
All Saint’s Day is part of the oft forgotten Allhallowtide triduum, which runs from 31st October – 2nd November, encompassing All Hallow’s Eve, All Saint’s Day and All Soul’s Day.

All Saint’s Day is a Catholic holiday in commemoration of Saints in general, but particularly to honor those who do not have designated days of their own. In Italy, the day is marked with Ceci con le Costine, a special soup made with chickpeas and pork ribs. Legend has it that if you eat this soup on November 1st, you’ll be blessed with good luck throughout the year.

According to Pagan beliefs, this time of year was when the veil between the living and the dead was at its thinnest. And so, All Soul’s Day is when the dead are remembered by the living. As well as religious services including prayers for souls in purgatory and the giving of Alms, informal services are held at homes. 

Because the dead are believed to return on this day, places are left for loved ones during meal times in Italian households. Unsurprisingly, food plays a major part of the festival in Italy, and homemade specialities such as fave dei morti and cotognata are enjoyed.

December 8: Immaculate Conception
A traditionally Catholic holiday celebrating the Virgin Mary’s immaculate conception, Italians use this date to mark the official start of the winter holiday season. 

This is the weekend when trees, lights, and decorations go up around Italy and Christmas markets spring up in cities and towns. 

Typically a long weekend, it’s a great time to soak in the Christmas atmosphere but beware that restaurants and hotels can often book up far in advance.
December 25-26: Christmas Day and Santo Stefano
On Christmas Eve and Christmas Day, you can participate in a midnight mass in any town in Italy, and enjoy the many different nativity scenes set up in seemingly every spare corner. 

In some places where the locals take specific pride in their nativity scenes, like Assisi, some of them may even feature real people and animals! 

On Christmas Day, most things are closed, so if you want to eat out, choose a restaurant beforehand and make a reservation (find out more about having a Christmas meal in Italy here). 

The day after Christmas Day is known as St. Stephen’s Day, and it’s also a public holiday in Italy, with banks, museums and shops often staying closed–so plan accordingly!

The Complete Guide to Italy's Festivals and Celebrations

Transportation in Italy:
Italy offers a well connected network of trains and buses that makes it relatives easy to move around the country, once you understand how the systems work. National and regional transport is efficient, but reaching small villages and rural areas can be more challenging without a car.
Trains in Italy
Trains are the main pillar of Italian national public transport.

High-speed trains (Frecciarossa, Italo) connect major cities like Rome, Milan, Florence, and Naples in just a few hours. Regional trains serve smaller towns and are cheaper, though often slower.
Buses and Coaches
Bus networks connect cities, towns, and remote areas not covered by train. Long-distance services such as Flixbus offer budget-friendly travel across Italy and into Europe, while local bus services are run by regional operators.
Driving in Italy
Driving is often the only way to reach rural areas. Italy’s Autostrade (motorways) are well maintained but toll-based. Towns and cities often have ZTL zones (restricted traffic areas) where access is limited to residents.

Flying and Ferries
Domestic flights connect major cities, but trains are often faster for short routes. Ferries link the mainland to islands such as Sardinia and Sicily and provide connections across the Mediterranean.

Other Options
Italy also offers alternatives like car sharing, motorino (scooters), and carpooling services. In cities like Rome and Milan, metro networks provide an additional option for getting around efficiently.

* Local customs and etiquette
1. Greetings and pleasantries: the magic of "Hello":
In Italy, greetings are not just a way to start a conversation but represent the essence of Italian conviviality and hospitality. When you enter a bar or shop, never forget to say "Hello" or "Good morning". These simple words open the doors to warm, genuine interactions. Body language plays a fundamental role: a sincere smile accompanied by a friendly gesture can make the difference.
When meeting with friends or acquaintances, hugging or kissing on the cheeks are common gestures, depending on familiarity. Remember that the number of kisses can vary depending on the region, as can the way of greeting. For example, in Milan it is common to have two kisses, while in other areas it may be just one.

2. Lunch and dinner: times to be respected
In Italy, meals are not just moments of nourishment, but real social ceremonies. Lunch and dinner follow very specific times that reflect the local culture and the rhythm of daily life.
Lunch, generally eaten between 1pm and 3pm, is an opportunity to gather with family and friends. It is common for restaurants to offer affordable menus of the day, perfect for a refreshing break. If you find yourself in Italy during these hours, don't be surprised if the restaurants are crowded; Italians love to take their time to savor every bite.
Dinner, however, takes place at a later time, usually between 8.00pm and 10.00pm. This is the time when families come together and conversations become more lively. In some regions, such as the South, dinner can start even later. It is not uncommon to see people strolling the streets after dinner, enjoying the lively atmosphere of the squares.

3. The art of coffee: how to order it
In Italy, coffee is not just a drink, but a real ritual that encompasses centuries of tradition and culture. When you find yourself in a bar, approach the counter with a smile and prepare to live a unique experience. Don't forget, the average Italian drinks coffee on the fly, often standing, and that's part of the charm.
Order your coffee with precision: a simple "An espresso, please" is not only correct, but also demonstrates respect for local customs. If you want something different, remember that the types of coffee are varied and each has its own specific name. Here are some options:
* Cappuccino: to be enjoyed only in the morning, it is a mixture of coffee and foamed milk.
* Macchiato: an espresso "macchiato" with a little milk, perfect for those who love a stronger flavour.
* Latte: be careful, do not confuse it with cappuccino; here you will only get warm milk with a coffee.

4. Behavior in restaurants: etiquette to follow
When it comes to eating out in Italy, restaurant etiquette is a fundamental aspect of gastronomic culture. Entering a restaurant is not just an act of consuming a meal, but a social ritual that deserves respect and attention. First of all, it is good practice to greet the staff with a polite "Good evening" or "Good morning" upon entry. This simple gesture creates a friendly and welcoming atmosphere.

During the meal, remember that conversation is an integral part of the experience. Speaking in a moderate voice and maintaining a respectful tone is appreciated. Don't forget to use cutlery correctly: in Italy, you eat with fork and knife in hand, and your hands should remain on the table.

When the time comes to order, avoids rushing the waiter. Italians like to take their time to enjoy their dishes, so be patient and order without rushing. When paying, remember that it is customary to leave a small contribution as a tip, generally between 5% and 10% of the total, if the service is not already included in the bill.

Finally, if you are asked to share a table, accept it with a smile: it is a sign of hospitality and openness typical of Italian culture. By following these simple guidelines, you will be able to enjoy the Italian culinary experience to the fullest, immersing yourself in its richness and tradition.

Italian dress code: dress with style
In Italy, the way we dress is not just a question of fashion, but a true art form. Dressing with style is essential to fully immerse yourself in the local culture and to feel at ease in every situation, whether it is an elegant dinner or a walk in the historic center.
Italians are known for their impeccable aesthetic sense and attention to detail. Well-cut clothes, harmonious colours and refined accessories are key elements of a look that attracts attention in a positive way. It's not uncommon to see men in crisp shirts and dress pants, and women sporting chic outfits, even during the day.
Here are some practical tips to avoid looking disfigured:
* Choose quality fabrics: Opt for cotton, linen or merino wool, which are not only pleasant to wear, but also suitable for the climate.
* Avoid excess casualness: Wearing jeans and a t-shirt is acceptable, but try to match everything with elegant shoes or thoughtful accessories.
* Attention at events: During a visit to churches or sacred places, it is advisable to cover shoulders and knees, respecting the rules of etiquette.
Remember, in Italy the dress code is not just a rule, but a way to express respect towards the culture and people you meet. Wearing your best smile together with nice clothing will help you feel part of this magical atmosphere.

Rules and etiquette of behavior in Italy: Cultural and behavioral norms. | TheBestItaly

10 Places To Enjoy Shopping In Italy:
1. Via Del Corso, Rome 
* Location: Via del Corso, Rome, Italy
* Famous For: souvenir shopping
2. Via Monte Napoleone, Milan
* Location: 20121 Milano, MI, Italy
* Famous For: Sophisticated shopping areas
3. Via Giovan Battista Zannoni, Florence
* Location: 50123 Firenze FI, Italy
* Famous For: chic bags, jackets
4. Mercerie, Venice
* Location: Between Rialto and San Marco, Venice, Italy
* Famous For: luxury shops
5. Via Toledo, Naples
* Location: Napoli, NA, Italy
* Famous For: boutiques
6. Via Mazzini, Verona
* Location: Verona, Italy
Famous For: clothes and shoes
7. Via Garibaldi, Genoa:
* Location: Genoa
Famous for: Souvenirs
8.  Via Polo, Turin:
* Location:Turin
* Famous for: cafes, and churches
9. The Streets Near The Harbor, Portofino
* Location:Portofino
* Famous for: Designer boutique

10. Via Rizzoli, Bologna
* Location:Bologna
* 
* Famous for: Jewellery and designer clothes.



